Self-Arising Wisdom
Songtsen Gampo Guru Sādhana
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

If you wish to practise the yogaOf the emanated king,Who showed great kindness to Tibet,Remain
at ease on a comfortable seat,Develop renunciation, take refuge and generate bodhicitta.
ah, tongpé ngang lé dün gyi khar
Ah. Out of the state of emptiness, in the sky before me
norbu chushel lé drubpé
Appears a vast celestial palace made of precious water crystal,
shyalmé khangchen yangpé nang
And in its centre,
ratné gyenpé tri tengdu
Upon a throne decorated with jewels
darzab bol chen tsekpé teng
And piles of silken cushions,
trulpé gyalpo song tsen jé
Is the emanated king, Lord Songtsen,
karsal shyi dzum tsenpé tré
Brilliant white, smiling serenely and adorned with major and minor marks.
gyalpö chajé ber cham sol
He wears a king's attire and a brocade cloak.
chak yé chö ché yön nyamshyak
His right hand is in the Dharma-teaching mudrā and his left rests in equanimity
norbu wang gi gyalpo nam
And holds the 'mighty sovereign' wish-granting jewel.
u la darkar la tö ching
On his head he wears a turban of white silk,
chiwor öpak mépa shyuk
With Buddha Amitābha seated at his crown.
shyab nyi gyalpo rolpé tab
His two feet are in the posture of royal ease.
tukkar pakpa chuchik shyal
At his heart is noble Avalokiteśvara with eleven faces,
dé yi tukkar chenrezik
And at his heart appears Avalokiteśvara Khasarpaṇi
khasar pani chak nyipa
With two arms and in standing form.
shyengpé tab kyi shyukpar sal
They all appear clearly in this way.
né sum yigé dru sum lé
From the three syllables at their three centres
ö trö yeshe chendrang gyur
Rays of light stream out to invite the wisdom deities.
Invite the deities with:
malü semchen kün gyi gön gyur ching
You are the protectors of all beings, every single one.
dü dé pung ché mi zé jom dzé lha
You are the deities who remorselessly destroy the māras and their forces.
ngö nam malü jishyin khyen gyurpé
You who know all things just as they are, in their true nature,
chomden khor ché né dir shek su sol
Enlightened ones, with your retinues, come now to this place!
chomden kalpa drangmé duma ru
Enlightened ones, over countless incalculable aeons,
dro la tsé chir tukjé nam jang shing
Because of your love for sentient beings, you cultivated compassion.
mönlam gyachen gongpa yongdzokpé
Your aspirations are vast, your vision all complete,
khyé shyé dro dön dzé dü di lak na
And if now is the time you intend to benefit beings,
dechir chöying podrang lhündrub né
Then from the palace of the dharmadhātu, spontaneously perfect,
dzutrul jinlab natsok tön dzé ching
Display all kinds of magical emanations and blessings,
tayé semchen tsok nam dralwé chir
And to liberate limitless sentient beings,
yong dak khor dangché té shek su sol
Come now, I pray and with you your retinue, in all their utter purity.
chö nam kün gyi wangchuk tso
You are the lords of all dharmas;
tsoma ser gyi dok dra shying
Like the hue of refined gold,
nyima lé lhak ziji ché
Your brilliance brighter than the sun.
depé chen ni drangwar gyi
With faith and devotion, I invite you here.
shyi shying tukjé ché denpa
You possess peace and great compassion,
dul shying samten sa la shyuk
You reside in gentleness and the stages of concentration;
chö dang yeshe chak dralwa
You possess Dharma and wisdom free from desire,
küntu mi zé nüpar den
And strength that is completely inexhaustible.
tsur chön tsur chön shyi dak la
Come now, come from that state of peace,
tubpa kyechok tamché khyen
Mighty sages, supreme beings, omniscient ones,
shintu lek jé zuknyen ni
Assume exquisite illusory forms,
chöpé né dir shek su sol
And come to this place of offerings, I pray!

chomden dir ni jönpa lek
Enlightened ones, welcome, now that you have come.
dakchak sönam kalwar den
We have such good fortune and merit.
dak gi chöyön shyé né kyang
Accept these offerings and then
tuk la gong shing nangwar dzö
Turn your minds towards us, please.

dak dang dro la tuk tsé chir
In your compassion for us and other beings,
nyi kyi dzutrul tu yi ni
Through your miraculous powers,
jisi chöpa dak gyi na
Remain here, we pray,
desi chomden yermé shyuk
For as long as we continue to make offerings.

dza hung bam ho | samaya tishta lhen
jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ | samaya tiṣṭha lhen
With this, samayasattva and jñānasattva merge inseparably. Recite the seven branches from Samantabhadra's
Aspiration to Good Actions and garlands of offerings of suitable length. It
is also possible to offer a maṇḍala.
solwa deb so pakchok chenrezik
To you I pray, supremely noble Avalokiteśvara,
solwa deb so trulpé gyalpo khyen
To you I pray, emanated king: care for me.
solwa deb so songtsen gampo jé
To you I pray, Lord Songtsen Gampo.
solwa deb so jingyi lab tu sol
To you I pray, inspire me with your blessings.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsal du sol
Grant supreme and ordinary attainments, I pray.
changchub sem chok jongwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to master sublime bodhicitta.
dro dön pakmé jungwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to benefit beings immeasurably.
trulpé gyalpo khyö dang tsungpar shok
Emanated king, may I become your equal!
And:
om ah maha guru lokeshwara nirmakaya dharmaradza sarwa siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ mahāguru lokeśvara nirmakāya dharmarāja sarva siddhi hūṃ
Recite this mantra.
trulpé gyalpö né nam né
From the realms of the emanated king,
ku dang ngak treng chaktsen tsok özer dangché char tar bab
A mass of enlightened forms, mantra-garlands and insignia showers down like rain, accompanied
by rays of light.
rang la tim shying wangkur tob
It all dissolves into me, and I receive empowerment.
drib dak ku shyi sabön shyak
Obscurations are purified, and the seeds of the four kāyas are implanted.
tar ni lama rang la tim
Finally the guru dissolves into me,
rangnyi trulpé gyalpor sal
And I too appear clearly as the emanated king.
tukkar da teng hung yik tar
At my heart, upon a moon disc, is the syllable Hūṃ,
ngak kyi trengwé korwa lé
Surrounded by the rotating mantra garland,
ö trö rangshyen dön nyi jé
From which light emanates to accomplish my own and others' welfare,
nöchü pakpé kur gyur sam
So that the environment and beings within it become forms of the Noble One.
om mani padmé hung
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
Recite as well the long dhāraṇī of eleven-faced Avalokiteśvara.
tar ni lha dang lama nam
Finally, I recognize both the deity and guru
rangsem chik gi rolpar ta
As the singular display of my own mind.
tong dang nyingjé yermepé
And I rest in the basic nature of awareness,
rigpé shiluk ngang la shyak
In which emptiness and compassion are indivisible.
At the end, dedicate the virtue and recite verses of aspiration and auspiciousness,
After the session, exert yourself in the ten forms of dharmic activity.
Through this you will perfect the twofold benefit of self and other.
This guru yoga arose as a visionWhile I was in the Moon Cave at YerpaAt dusk on the sixth day
of the kārtika (tenth) month,And I set it in down in writing accordingly.

Through the virtue of this, May the benefit and happiness of the teachings and beings increase,And
may this become a cause for the inspiration and blessingsOf the great guru and emanated
dharma-king to infuse us all.

Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "srong btsan sgam po'i bla sgrub ye shes rang shar/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 10: 43–45